[docs] Add documentation for Observe (#44816)
expo/expo: docs/pages/eas/observe/configuration.mdx

---
title: Configure EAS Observe
sidebar_title: Configuration
description: Control how EAS Observe collects and dispatches metrics, including environment settings, development mode, and custom endpoints.
---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Configure EAS Observe at runtime to fit your app's build setup, environment, and data routing. This page covers the `configure()` and `dispatchEvents()`, enabling metrics in development, using a custom endpoint, and separating data by environment.

```

We should provide an introduction to page. Not only it helps readers to see the summary but also good for SEO.

## `configure()`

Use the `configure()` method to control how EAS Observe behaves at runtime:

```js
import ExpoObserve from 'expo-observe';

ExpoObserve.configure({
  environment: 'production',
  dispatchingEnabled: true,
});
```

| Option               | Type      | Default                | Description                                    |
| -------------------- | --------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `environment`        | `string`  | `process.env.NODE_ENV` | The environment label for observability events |
| `dispatchingEnabled` | `boolean` | `true`                 | Whether to send collected events to the server |

## `dispatchEvents()`

> Events are automatically dispatched when the app moves to the background. On iOS, this happens when the app resigns active state or is about to terminate. On Android, a background worker dispatches events once network connectivity is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Events are automatically dispatched when the app moves to the background. On Android, a background worker dispatches events once network connectivity is available. On iOS, this happens when the app resigns active state or is about to terminate.
```

Platform order as per our writing style guide: https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#platform-order-when-referencing-android-ios-and-web-or-multiple-platforms

To flush events manually (for example, during testing or to ensure events are sent before a specific point), call `dispatchEvents()`:

```js
import ExpoObserve from 'expo-observe';

await ExpoObserve.dispatchEvents();
```

## Enable metrics in development

By default, metrics with the `development` environment are filtered out and not dispatched to the server. To collect development metrics (for example, to test your integration), set `enableInDebug` to `true` in your **app config**:

> ```json

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```json app.json
````

{
  "expo": {
    "extra": {
      "eas": {
        "observe": {
          "enableInDebug": true
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> **warning** Enable this only when testing your EAS Observe integration. Development performance differs significantly from production, so collecting development metrics may affect the results shown in your dashboard.

## Custom endpoint

If you need to change the endpoint for the observability API, set the `endpointUrl` value in your **app config**:

> ```json

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```json app.json
````

{
  "expo": {
    "extra": {
      "eas": {
        "observe": {
          "endpointUrl": "https://your-custom-endpoint.com"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> After changing the endpoint, run `npx expo prebuild` to regenerate native code.

Reviewer: could we add explanation here on why native code generation is required? I am not sure, just asking, but I found `prebuild` command specified here for the only time in this section and was a bit surprised. Please ignore my comment if irrelevant.

## Environments

> All metrics are grouped by environment. The environment value is derived from `process.env.NODE_ENV` by default, or can be overridden using `configure({ environment })`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All metrics are grouped by environment. The environment value is derived from `process.env.NODE_ENV` by default. To override it, use [`configure({ environment })`](#configure).
```

> Metrics with the `development` environment are filtered out before dispatching unless `enableInDebug` is set to `true` in your app config (see above). You can also disable all dispatching globally using `configure({ dispatchingEnabled: false })`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics with the `development` environment are filtered out before dispatching unless [`enableInDebug` is set to `true`](#enable-metrics-in-development) in your app config. You can also disable all dispatching globally using `configure({ dispatchingEnabled: false })`.
```
